#summary Guide to the Verilog testing method.

= Running Test =

  # Open Modelsim
  # Change to the root directory of the svn tree (the folder with src/ and testing/)
  # Type do debug.fdo
  # If there are no errors, type run 10000ns (or n * 1000ns where n is the number of tests)
  # Something like the following should be printed:
{{{
# Simulation           0 succeeded (start time          0)
# Writing value          7 to address 00000050
# Simulation           1 succeeded (start time        100)
# Simulation           2 succeeded (start time        200)
# Simulation           3 succeeded (start time        300)
# Simulation           4 succeeded (start time        400)
# Simulation           5 succeeded (start time        500)
# Simulation           6 succeeded (start time        600)
# Writing value ffffffff to address 00000010
# Writing value 00000000 to address 00000011
# Writing value 55005500 to address 00000012
# Writing value 550000ff to address 00000014
# Simulation           7 succeeded (start time        700)
# Writing value 1234abcd to address 00000018
# Writing value 0000001f to address 00000018
# Simulation           8 succeeded (start time        800)
# Writing value         12 to address 0000000c
# Simulation           9 FAILED    (start time        900)
# Test complete --           9 out of          10 passed
}}}

= Viewing More Internal Objects =

*Note these instructions are not necessary if you use the debug.fdo script*

By default Modelsim will optimize and not make it possible to view most internal components of the simulation (in a waveform view for example).  

You can bypass this (while also making the simulation slower) by doing the following:

The vopt (opimization) command can control the visibility of components.  The +acc flag determines which components are visible.  Type {{{vopt -help}}} to see the various components that +acc controls.  In the following example "rn" refers to registers and nets. 

To make these things visible, once Modelsim is open, type this into the console:

{{{
vopt +acc=rn testbench -o testbench_debug
}}}

Switch to optimized mode with 

{{{
vsim testbench_debug
}}}

You may now view various components of the system in the Workspace by dragging the corresponding objects to the waveform window. 

Finally run as usual.

{{{
run 100000ns
}}}